Memory Hierarchy.

Accessing data and instructions from main memory is a time consuming operation
which delays the work of the fast processors, for that reason the memory
hierarchy includes smaller and faster memories called caches. Caches
improve the performance by exploiting the spatial and temporal locality of
the memory access.

In modern processors the hierarchy of caches is structured as follows,
higher-level caches, located closer to the processor core, are smaller and
faster than low-level caches, which are located closer to main memory.
Recent Intel architecture typically has three levels of cache: L1, L2 and
Last-Level Cache (LLC).

Each core has two L1 caches, a data cache and an instruction cache, each 32
KiB in size with an access time of 4 cycles. L2 caches are also core-private
and have an inter-mediate size (256 KiB) and latency (7 cycles). The LLC is
shared among all of the cores and is a unified cache, containing both data
and instructions. Typical LLC sizes are in megabytes and access time is in
the order of 40 cycles.

The unit of memory and allocation in a cache is called cache line.
Cache lines are of a fixed size B, which is typically 64 bytes.
The lg(B) low-order bits of the address, called line offset, are used to
locate the datum in the cache line.

When a memory address is accessed, the processor checks the availability
of the address line in the top-level L1 cache. If the data is there then it
is served to the processor, a situation referred to as a cache hit. In a
cache miss, when the data is not found in the L1 cache, the processor
repeats the search for the line in the next cache level and continues
through all the caches. Once the line is found, the processor stores a copy
in the cache for future use.

Most caches are set-associative. They are composed of multiple cache sets i
each containing a fixed number of cache lines. The number of cache lines in
a set is the cache associativity, i.e., a cache with W lines in each set is a
W-way set-associative cache.

Since the main memory is orders of magnitude larger than the cache, more than
W memory lines may map to the same cache set. If a cache miss occurs and all
the cache lines in the matching cache set are in use, one of the cached
lines is evicted, freeing a slot for a new line to be fetched from a
lower-level memory. Several cache replacement policies exist to determine
the cache line to evict when a cache miss occurs but the typical policy in
use is an approximation to the least-recently-used (LRU).

The last-level cache in modern Intel processors is inclusive. Inclusive
caches contain a superset of the contents of the cache levels above them.
In the case of Intel processors, the contents of the L1 and L2 caches is
also stored in the last-level cache. A consequence of the inclusion property
is that when data is evicted from the last-level cache it is also evicted
from all of the other levels of cache in the processor.

Intel architecture implements several cache optimizations. The spatial
pre-fetcher pairs cache lines and attempt to fetch the pair of a missed line
[17]. Consecutive accesses to memory addresses are detected and pre-fetched
when the processor anticipates they may be required [17]. Additionally, when
the processor is presented with a conditional branch, speculative execution
brings the data of both branches into the cache before the branch condition
is evaluated [35].  [30] noted that tracing the sequence of cache hits and
misses of software may leak information on the internal working of the
software, including information that may lead to recovering cryptographic
keys.

This idea was later extended and used for mounting several cache-based
side-channel attacks [10, 29, 31]. Other attacks were shown against
the L1-instruction cache [3], the branch prediction buffer [1, 2] and
the last-level cache [20, 22, 25, 40].

The Flush+Reload Attack.

Our LLC-based attack is based on the Flush+Reload [20, 40] attack, which is
a cache-based side-channel attack technique. Unlike the earlier Prime+Probe
technique [29, 31] that detects activity in cache sets, the Flush+Reload
technique identifies access to memory lines, giving it a higher resolution,
a high accuracy and high signal-to-noise ratio.

Like Prime+Probe, Flush+Reload relies on cache sharing between processes.
Additionally, it requires data sharing, which is typically achieved through
the use of shared libraries or using page de-duplication [6, 36].

A round of the attack, which identifies victim access to a shared memory
line, consists of three phases. In the first phase the adversary evicts
the monitored memory line from the cache. In the second phase, the
adversary waits a period of time so the victim has an opportunity to access
the memory line. In the third phase, the adversary measures the time it takes
to reload the memory line. If during the second phase the victim accesses the
memory line, the line will be available in the cache and the reload operation
in the third phase will take a short time. If, on the other hand, the victim
does not access the memory line then the third phase takes a longer time
as the memory line is loaded from main memory.

The execution of the victim and the adversary processes are independent of
each other, thus synchronization of probing is important and several factors
need to be considered when processing the side-channel data. Some of those
factors are the waiting period for the adversary between probes, memory
lines to be probed, size of the side-channel trace and cache-hit threshold.
One important goal for this attack is to achieve the best resolution
possible while keeping the error rate low and one of the ways to achieve this
is by targeting memory lines that occur frequently during execution, such
as loop bodies. Several processor optimizations are in place during a
typical process execution and an attacker must be aware of these
optimizations to filter them during the analysis of the attack results.
See [4, 39, 40] for discussions of some of these parameters.

A typical implementation of the Flush+Reload attack makes use of the
clflush instruction of the x86 and x64 instruction sets. The clflush
instruction evicts a specific memory line from all the cache hierarchy
and being an un- privileged instruction, it can be used by any process.

The inclusiveness of the LLC is essential for the Flush+ Reload attack.
Whenever a memory line is evicted from the LLC, the processor also evicts
the line from all of the L1 and L2 caches. On processors that do not have
an inclusive LLC, e.g., AMD processors, the attack does not work [40].
See [24] for a variant of the technique that does not require an
inclusive LLC.

The Digital Signature Algorithm (DSA).

A variant of the ElGamal signature scheme, DSA was first proposed by the U.S.
National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST). DSA uses the
multiplicative group of a finite field. We use the following notation for DSA.
Parameters: Primes p, q such that q divides (p − 1), a generator g of
multiplicative order q in GF (p) and an approved hash function h
(e.g. SHA-1, SHA-256, SHA-512).

Private-Public key pairs: The private key α is an integer uniformly chosen
such that 0 < α < q and the corresponding public key y is given by
y = g^α mod p. Calculating the private key given the public key requires
solving the discrete logarithm problem and for correctly chosen parameters,
this is an intractable problem.

Signing: A given party, Alice, wants to send a signed message m to Bob: the
message m is not necessarily encrypted. Using her private-public key pair
(αA , yA ), Alice performs the following steps:
1. Select uniformly at random a secret nonce k such that 0<k<q.
2. Compute r = (g^k mod p) mod q and h(m).
3. Compute s = k^(−1) (h(m) + αA r) mod q.
4. Alice sends (m, r, s) to Bob.

Verifying: Bob wants to be sure the message he received comes from
Alice: a valid DSA signature gives strong evidence of authenticity. Bob
performs the following steps to verify the signature:
1. Reject the signature if it does not satisfy 0 < r < q and 0<s<q.
2. Compute w = s^(−1) mod q and h(m).
3. Compute u1 = h(m)w mod q and u2 = rw mod q.
4. Compute v = (g^(u1) yA ^(u2) mod p) mod q.
5. Accept the signature if and only if v = r holds.

DSA in Practice.

Putting it mildly, there is no consensus on key sizes, and furthermore
keys seen in the wild and used in ubiquitous protocols have varying
sizes—sometimes dictated by existing and deployed standards. For example,
NIST defines 1024-bit p with 160-bit q as “legacy-use” and 2048-bit p
with 256-bit q as “acceptable” [8]. We focus on these two parameter sets.

SSH’s Transport Layer Protocol lists DSA key type ssh-dss as “required” and
defines r and s as 160-bit integers, implying 160-bit q. In fact the
OpenSSH tool ssh-keygen defaults to 160-bit q and 1024-bit p for these key
types, not allowing the user to override that option, and using the same
parameters to generate the server’s host key. It is worth noting that
recently as of version 7.0, OpenSSH disables host server DSA keys by a
configurable default option, but of course this does not affect already
deployed solutions.

As a countermeasure to previous timing attacks, OpenSSL’s DSA implementation
pads nonces by adding either q or 2q to k. For the DSA signing algorithm,
Step 2 is the performance bottleneck and the exponentiation algorithm used
will prove to be of extreme importance when we later collect our side-channel
information.
